Counteracting age-related VEGF signaling insufficiency promotes healthy aging and extends life span
More VEGF, more life—and health span
Advanced aging is celebrated but its ill effects, deterioration at the cell, tissue, and organ levels, are not. Grunewald et al. provide evidence for the vascular theory of aging, which reports that age-related decrease of vascular function is a driver of organismal aging at large (see the Perspective by Augustin and Kipnis). Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling insufficiency underlies this vascular insufficiency in aged mice. A modest compensatory increase in circulatory VEGF was sufficient to preserve a young-like vascular homeostasis, alleviate multiple adverse age-related processes, and ameliorate a host of age-associated pathologies in mice. —BAP
Structured Abstract
INTRODUCTION
All body cells rely on blood vessels (BVs) for the provision of oxygen and other blood-borne substances and, in certain settings, also for the provision of endothelial-derived paracrine factors. Like other organ systems, the vascular system undergoes aging, which leads to progressive functional deterioration. Given the centrality of BVs to organ homeostasis, it has been hypothesized that vascular aging is an upstream, founding factor in organismal aging, but experimental support for this proposition is limited. Vascular aging involves both large and small vessels, with the latter marked by capillary rarefaction, i.e., age-related failure to maintain adequate microvascular density (MVD). A key homeostatic mechanism preventing MVD reduction relies on the angiogenic activity of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which by virtue of its hypoxic inducibility, constantly acts to replenish lost vessels and match vascular supply to the tissue needs. The reason(s) that VEGF fails to do so during aging is unknown.
RATIONALE
Compromised vascular function is expected to perturb organ homeostasis in ways conducive for the development of age-related frailties and diseases. Accordingly, counteracting critical facets of vascular aging might be a useful approach for their alleviation. The presumption that insufficient vascular supply in aging is underlined by VEGF signaling insufficiency, primarily (but not exclusively) because of its indispensable role in preventing capillary loss, led us to investigate whether securing a young-like level of VEGF signaling might rectify capillary loss and its sequelae. On the premise that deteriorated vascular function is an upstream driver of multiorgan malfunctioning, it is envisioned that its rectification might confer comprehensive geroprotection.
RESULTS
Although VEGF production is not significantly reduced during mouse aging, longitudinal monitoring revealed that VEGF signaling was greatly reduced in multiple key organs. This was associated with increased production of soluble VEGFR1 (sVEGFR1) generated through an age-related shift in alternative splicing of VEGFR1 mRNA and its activity as a VEGF trap. A modest increase of circulatory VEGF using a transgenic VEGF gain-of-function system or adeno-associated virus (AAV)–assisted VEGF transduction maintained a more youthful level of VEGF signaling and provided protection from age-related capillary loss, compromised perfusion, and reduced tissue oxygenation. Aging hallmarks such as mitochondrial dysfunction, compromised metabolic flexibility, endothelial cell senescence, and inflammaging were alleviated in VEGF-treated mice. Conversely, VEGF loss of function by conditional induction of transgenic sFlt1 in endothelial cells accelerated the development of these adverse age-related phenotypes. VEGF-treated mice lived longer and had an extended health span, as reflected by reduced abdominal fat accumulation, reduced liver steatosis, reduced muscle loss (sarcopenia) associated with better preservation of muscle-generating force, reduced bone loss (osteoporosis), reduced kyphosis, and reduced burden of spontaneous tumors.
CONCLUSION
The study provides compelling evidence for the proposition that vascular aging is a hierarchically high driver of overall organismal aging. It places VEGF signaling insufficiency at center stage to multiorgan aging and suggests that its undoing might confer comprehensive geroprotection.

Centrality of VEGF and vascular alterations in age-related phenotypes.
Shown is a graphic representation of age-associated alterations in organ physiology and function (orange arrows) alleviated by VEGF gain of function (green arrows). Insert shows vascular casts of a native adult mouse myocardium before (control) and after sVEGFR1 induction, highlighting a failure to maintain adequate MVD in the presence of impaired VEGF signaling, a process that takes place naturally during aging. OCR, oxygen consumption rate; CH, carbohydrate; RQ, respiratory quotient; pVEGFR2: phosphorylated VEGFR2.
Abstract
Aging is an established risk factor for vascular diseases, but vascular aging itself may contribute to the progressive deterioration of organ function. Here, we show in aged mice that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling insufficiency, which is caused by increased production of decoy receptors, may drive physiological aging across multiple organ systems. Increasing VEGF signaling prevented age-associated capillary loss, improved organ perfusion and function, and extended life span. Healthier aging was evidenced by favorable metabolism and body composition and amelioration of aging-associated pathologies including hepatic steatosis, sarcopenia, osteoporosis, “inflammaging” (age-related multiorgan chronic inflammation), and increased tumor burden. These results indicate that VEGF signaling insufficiency affects organ aging in mice and suggest that modulating this pathway may result in increased mammalian life span and improved overall health.

ging itself may contribute to theprogressive deterioration of organ function. Here, we show in aged mice that vascular endothelial growth factor(VEGF) signaling insufficiency, which is caused by increased production of decoy receptors, may drivephysiological aging across multiple organ systems. Increasing VEGF signaling prevented age-associated capillaryloss, improved organ perfusion and function, and extended life span. Healthier aging was evidenced by favorablemetabolism and body composition and amelioration of aging-associated pathologies including hepatic steatosis,sarcopenia, osteoporosis, “inflammaging” (age-related multiorgan chronic inflammation), and increased tumorburden. These results indicate that VEGF signaling insufficiency affects organ aging in mice and suggest thatmodulating this pathway may result in increased mammalian life span and improved overall health.The vascular system is the largest cellularnetwork that is shared by all organs. Allcells in our body depend on blood ves-sels (BVs) for the provision of oxygenand other blood-borne substances, wasteremoval, and supply of essential angiocrinefactors secreted by endothelial cells (ECs)(1). Like other organ systems, BVs undergoaging that is associated with reduced func-tionality (2). Therefore, age-related loss ofvascular function is likely to affect organ phys-iology, prompting a “vascular theory of aging”(3), i.e., the proposition that vascular aging isa high driver of aging, but experimental proofis limited.Pathologies affecting the arteries, which in-clude arterial stiffening, atherosclerosis, andother vascular occlusive events, lead to a host ofcardiovascular diseases (CVDs) the prevalenceof which increases with age (4). The mostsubstantial age-related process affecting capil-laries in all organs is a progressive reductionin microvascular density (MVD), a phenome-non known as microvascular rarefaction (2, 5).Alleviation or aggravation of age-associatedpathologies other than “classical” CVDs byvascular manipulation have been demonstra-ted in a few animal studies (6–11).Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)is a highly pleiotropic growth factor with bothvascular and nonvascular functions (12). Inaddition to its angiogenic activity, VEGF playsessential roles in controlling vascular perme-ability, sustaining the survival of newly formedBVs, maintaining organ-specific vascular traitssuch as the formation and maintenance ofcapillary fenestrations and other EC barrierfunctions, and the induction of certain organ-specific angiocrine factors (1). VEGF can beproduced in many adult tissues, and its cog-nate receptors, which are expressed in ECsand in a host of nonvascular cells, are oftenconstitutively phosphorylated, suggesting ac-tive VEGF signaling (13). Because it is inducedby hypoxia, VEGF constantly acts and is in-dispensable in matching MVD to changes intissue needs (14). Previous studies have shownthat age-dependent decline of hippocampalneurogenesis (15), liver regeneration (16), andskeletal muscle exercise capacity (8) can bealleviated by improved VEGF signaling. Inthis study, we investigated whether counteract-ing age-related impairment of VEGF signalingmay confer comprehensive geroprotection.Maintenance of VEGF signaling in aged miceprevents microvascular rarefaction andimproves tissue perfusion and oxygenationTo determine whether the failure to maintainadequate MVD in aging is caused by insuffi-cient VEGF signaling, we investigated whethersecuring a young-like level of VEGF signalingthrough a compensatory, mild increase ofsystemic VEGF levels might prevent micro-vascular rarefaction and its adverse sequelae.A bi-transgenic “Tet-off” mouse platform wasused in which transgenic VEGF produced byhepatocytes is continuously released into thesystemic circulation and is accessible to allperipheral tissues (see the supplementary ma-terials and methods for a description of theTet-off system used). Circulating VEGF levelsin these mice (designated “VEGF mice”) fromearly to middle adulthood and throughouttheir life span, are twofold higher than thehomeostatic levels of circulatory VEGF (Fig. 1Aand fig. S1). All measurements and phenotypesare based on pairwise comparisons of VEGFmice and littermate controls maintained underidentical conditions. Serving as controls werelittermates that inherited only one of the twotransgenes required for transgenic VEGF in-duction, thus arguing against possible influ-ences exerted by transgene integration sites.In control mice, systemic VEGF levels andVEGF levels in major peripheral organs (fig. S2)did not significantly decrease with age in mostexamined organs. To determine the status ofVEGF signaling in aging, we measured relativelevels of VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2) phospho-rylation of tyrosine 1175, a site shown to beessential for VEGF-promoted EC proliferation(17). VEGF signaling was compromised in24-month-old (Mo) control mice but not inVEGF mice littermates, which maintained ayoung-like level of VEGFR2 phosphorylationnot just in the liver (the organ from whichtransgenic VEGF emanates) but also in remoteorgans, as represented here by hindlimb mus-cle (Fig. 1B).To understand the discordance betweenVEGF protein and VEGF signaling levels inaging, we investigated whether natural decoyreceptors such as soluble VEGF receptor1 (sFlt1) (18) might have trapped VEGF (18).Longitudinal monitoring revealed progressivebuildup of sFlt1 in plasma such that by 1 yearof age, sFlt1 levels were already twofold higherthan during early adulthood (Fig. 1C). Age-associated increase of sFlt1 expression in theaorta, hepatic central veins, hepatic sinusoidalECs, and muscle capillaries were identified asthe major, albeit not the exclusive, sources ofcirculatory sFlt1 (Fig. 1D). There was no sig-nificant age-associated change in tissue ex-pression of full-length VEGFR1 mRNA (fig. S3).Increased sFlt1 production could be attributedto an age-associated shift in alternative splicingtoward increased sFlt1 mRNA production atthe expense of mRNA encoding the full-lengthreceptor (Fig. 1E).To prove a causal relationship between ex-cessive sFlt1 production and reduced VEGFsignaling, sFlt1 was conditionally induced in abi-transgenic Tet-off system composed of anendothelial-specific driver transgene and asFlt1 responder transgene (mice designated as“sFlt1 mice”). Earlier accumulation of sFlt1in adult mice to levels comparable to thoseRES EARCHGrunewald et al., Science 373, eabc8479 (2021) 30 July 2021 1 of 91Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,Jerusalem, Israel. 2Wohl Institute for TranslationalMedicine and the Goldyne Savad Institute for GeneTherapy, Hadassah Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.3Pediatric Pulmonology and Sleep Unit, Departmentof Pediatrics, Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.4Obesity and Metabolism Laboratory, Institute for DrugResearch, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, TheHebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel. 5Bio-Imaging Unit,The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, TheHebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel. 6TranslationalCancer Biology Program, Research Programs Unit, Facultyof Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.7Topographic and Clinical Anatomy, Institute of Anatomy,University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.*Corresponding author. Email: myriamg@ekmd.huji.ac.il (M.G.);elik@ekmd.huji.ac.il (E.K.) †These authors contributed equally tothis work.on July 31, 2021http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from
Page 3
Grunewald et al., Science 373, eabc8479 (2021) 30 July 2021 2 of 9Fig. 1. VEGF signaling is essential to maintaining adequate tissue MVD.(A) Plasma VEGF protein levels determined longitudinally in control and VEGF malemice. (B) Quantification of the phosphorylated fraction (pVEGFR2: position Y1175)relative to total VEGFR2 in liver and muscle lysates obtained from male mice ofthe indicated ages. Top: representative immunoblots. Bottom: pVEGFR2/VEGFR2ratio. (C) sFlt1 protein levels in plasma of control mice pooled in the indicated agegroups. (D) Representative tissue sections of control male mice immunostained withsFlt1-specific antibody and counterstained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).Arrowheads indicate sFlt1-positive endothelial cells, white asterisks are sFlt1-positivemedial cells, and black asterisks are sFlt1-positive adventitial cells (E) sFlt1/Flt1mRNA ratio in the indicated organs and ages. (F) VEGFR2 phosphorylation in liver andmuscle of 16 Mo mice in which sFlt1 was induced 8 months earlier. Top: representativeimmunoblots. Bottom: pVEGFR2/VEGFR2 ratio. (G) MVDs in the indicated organsretrieved at the indicated ages and expressed as the relative area covered byCD31+ BVs in the respective tissue sections. For WAT, MVDs are expressed as thenumber of CD31+ ECs per milligram of tissue as enumerated by flow cytometry.(H) MVDs in muscle (left) and liver (right) isolated from sFlt1-induced mice.(I) Densities of perfused vessels marked by uptake of intravenously injectedfluorescent VE-cadherin antibodies, calculated as the relative area covered by stainedcapillaries. Each dot represents the average of 10 tissue sections per mouse.(J) Blood oxygen saturation levels (sO2) determined by ultrasound photoacousticsin the hindlimbs of 3 and 24 Mo control and VEGF male and female mice. Left:representative images. Right: quantification of sO2. Values are shown as mean ± SEM.P values were derived from two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni posttests (A); one-wayANOVA and Tukey posttests [(B), (C), and (F) to (J)]; or two-tailed Student’s t test(E). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; P values > 0.05 are not indicated.RES EARCH | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L Eon July 31, 2021http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from
Page 4
produced naturally in older mice (fig. S4)resulted in further reduction of VEGF sig-naling in liver and hindlimb muscle (Fig. 1F).Microvascular densities in young, old, andold VEGF mice were compared by direct vi-sualization of immunostained BVs in tissuesections and, independently, by flow cytom-etry–aided EC quantification. We validated asubstantial microvascular rarefaction in theliver, muscle, and brown and white adiposetissues of 24 Mo mice. By contrast, micro-vascular rarefaction was almost fully pre-vented in age-matched VEGF mice (Fig. 1Gand fig. S5). Conversely, experimental VEGFblockade through conditional sFlt1 inductionled to accelerated capillary loss, reinforcing arequirement for ongoing VEGF signaling forMVD maintenance (Fig. 1H).To examine age-associated changes in per-fusion, the luminal surfaces of perfused BVswere selectively tagged by intravenously in-jected, fluorescently labeled vascular endothe-lial (VE)–cadherin antibodies and subsequentlyvisualized in tissue sections. Reduced perfusionwas observed in 16 Mo control mice but not inage-matched VEGF mice, which maintained ayoung-like level of perfusion (Fig. 1I and fig. S6).Compromised perfusion and its VEGF-aidedamelioration were functionally reflected intissue oxygenation, as measured by ultra-sound combined with photoacoustic imaging.The severe reduction in hindlimb muscleoxygenation observed in 24 Mo mice wasalleviated in age-matched VEGF mice (Fig. 1J).VEGF-treated mice have an extended lifespan and favorable metabolism andbody compositionVEGF mice of both sexes displayed an extendedmedian survival and a greater maximal life spancompared with their control littermates (Fig. 2A).A litter-by-litter account and levels of circulatingGrunewald et al., Science 373, eabc8479 (2021) 30 July 2021 3 of 9Fig. 2. Increased life span and improvedbody composition and metabolism of agedVEGF-treated mice. (A) Kaplan-Meier survivalcurves of male and female mice. The controlgroup was subdivided into mice harboring only thedriver transgene and mice harboring only theresponder transgene. Curves shown also includedmice censored for reasons outlined in tables S1and S2. Percentage indicated is of increasedmedian survival of VEGF mice (P < 0.0001).(B) Body weights of male mice divided in agegroups of 5 to 6 months each. (C) Lean-to-fatbody mass ratio calculated on the basis of echo-MRI measurements in male mice. (D) Circadianchanges in carbohydrate (CHO) and fat oxidation(FO) and in RQ individually measured in 4 and16 Mo male mice. (E) Circadian changes in CHOand FO and in RQ in 8 Mo mice infected 6 monthsearlier with a low titer of AAV-VEGF164. Controlmice were injected with the same titer ofAAV-control. (F) TEE of 4 Mo control mice and16 Mo male controls and VEGF mice normalized toeffective body mass. (G) Thermogenic brownand beige adipocytes in BAT and WAT. Top:representative H&E–stained BAT sectionsresected from 3 and 20 Mo mice. Bottom:representative UCP1-immunostained sectionsof abdominal WAT. Values are shown asmean ± SEM. P values were derived from log-rank(Mantel-Cox) test (A); two-tailed unpairedStudent’s t test [(B) and (D) to (F)]; or one-wayANOVA and Tukey posttests (C). *P < 0.05;**P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; P values > 0.05are not indicated.RES EARCH | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L Eon July 31, 2021http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from
Page 5
Grunewald et al., Science 373, eabc8479 (2021) 30 July 2021 4 of 9Fig. 3. Age-related alterations in fat distribution and liver pathology negatedby VEGF. (A) Progressive accumulation of abdominal fat in a representative pair ofcontrol and VEGF male mice littermates visualized by MRI (fat appears white).(B) Combined weights of epididymal and inguinal fat resected from young and oldmale mice. (C) Left: representative Masson-Trichrome–stained skin sectionsfrom 3 and 24 Mo male mice. Arrowheads indicate subdermal capillaries.E, epidermis; D, dermis; M, muscle. Right: number of subdermal adipocyte layers.(D) Representative liver sections from 3 and 24 Mo mice stained with OilRed O and counterstained with H&E. Right: quantification of lipid accumulationin hepatocytes. Each dot represents the average area covered by Oil Red Ostaining from three to six different sections per mouse. (E) Quantification of lipidaccumulation in hepatocytes in livers isolated from 3 and 16 Mo control andsFlt1 mice (F) Serum levels of the liver enzymes alanine transaminase (ALT) andaspartate transaminase (AST). (G) Representative liver cryosections stained forSA-b-gal. (H) Fraction of senescent ECs (Cd45–Ter119–CD31+ SA-b-gal+ cells) fromtotal ECs (Cd45–Ter119–CD31+ SA-b-gal– cells) enumerated by fluorescence-activated cell-sorting analysis. (I) Relative levels of p16 mRNA expression in livermeasured by RT-PCR. Values are shown as mean ± SEM. P values in (B) to (F)and (H) and (I) were derived from one-way ANOVA and Tukey posttests.*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; P values > 0.05 are not indicated.RES EARCH | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L Eon July 31, 2021http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from
Page 6
VEGF for each mouse used in longevity meas-urements are provided in tables S1 to S4.Unlike in most other life span–prolonginginterventions characterized by a rightward shiftof a sigmoidal curve, VEGF mice (particularlyfemales) presented an atypical survival curvedistinguished by its “rectangularization,” re-flecting that most VEGF mice were still alivewhen their control littermates were all moribundor dead. This apparent compressed morbidityperiod indicated that, independent of longevity,VEGF mice may have an increased health span.Age-associated weight gain was significantlylower in VEGF mice and accelerated weightloss typifying moribund mice did not takeplace in VEGF mice, which maintained astable weight up to a few weeks before theirdeath (Fig. 2B and fig. S7). Echo-magneticresonance imaging (echo-MRI)–based anal-ysis of fat-to-lean body mass ratio indicatedthat the fat gain observed during the secondyear of life in control mice was reduced inage-matched VEGF mice of either sex (Fig.2C and fig. S8).Carbohydrate utilization and respiratoryquotient (RQ) were much higher in VEGFmice (Fig. 2D and fig. S9). The choice ofsubstrates used for energy production at oldage correlates with a substrate preferencetoward lipids, reflecting a reduced capacityfor carbohydrate oxidation (19). VEGF treat-ment significantly improved flexibility insubstrate usage in old age, as also evidencedby the higher dynamic circadian changes in RQ(fig. S10). A similar metabolic phenotype wasobserved in an independent, non-transgenicGrunewald et al., Science 373, eabc8479 (2021) 30 July 2021 5 of 9Fig. 4. Alleviation of sarcopeniaand osteoporosis in old VEGF-treated mice. (A) Left: represen-tative H&E–stained sections ofhindlimb muscle showing mispo-sitioned, centrally located nuclei(arrowheads) in muscle fibers of24 Mo control mice but rarely in3 Mo or 24 Mo VEGF mice. Right:fraction of centrally located nucleimeasured in three sections foreach mouse. (B) Density of sub-sarcolemmal mitochondria (Ss),determined as the relative area ina sarcolemma segment occupiedby Ss. (C) OCR measured ex vivoin myofibrils isolated from hin-dlimb muscle using a Seahorseplatform and normalized to totalprotein content. Each dot repre-sents pooled myofibers isolatedfrom a mouse (compiled fromfour independent experiments).(D) Mice of the indicated ageswere tested for the time that theywere able to stay on a rotatingrod. (E) Rotarod analysis per-formed on mice preinfected withAAV-VEGF or with AAV-control.(F) MVDs in muscle of the samemice used in (E). (G) Left: repre-sentative micro-CT bone imagesof hindlimb tibias of 24 Mo femalecontrol and VEGF littermates.Images shown are a transverseview at the level marked onthe left with a red line. Right: bonevolumes calculated and expressedas the fraction of total areaoccupied by bone. (H) Represent-ative images of whole-bodyx-rays of 24 Mo male control andVEGF littermates. Kyphosis indiceswere measured from x-ray images inmice of the indicated ages. Valuesare shown as mean ± SEM. P valueswere derived from one-way ANOVAand Tukey posttest [(A) to (C) and(H)] or two-tailed unpaired Stu-dent’s t test [(D) to (G)]. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; P values > 0.05 are not indicated.RES EARCH | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L Eon July 31, 2021http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from
Page 7
VEGF gain-of-function system based on adeno-associated virus (AAV)–mediated VEGF164delivery. A low titer of VEGF164-encoding AAV(AAV-VEGF) was used, yielding the targeted lev-el of 150 to 200 pg/ml (fig. S11) (i.e., a level com-parable to the one attained in the transgenicplatform). Increased carbohydrate oxidationand a significantly higher RQ were observedusing two different time frames for AAV in-jections: (i) at the age of 2 months with themetabolic phenotype examined 6 months later(Fig. 2E) or (ii) at the age of 8 months withexamination 2 months later (fig. S12).The observed metabolic changes were notassociated with differences in food and waterintakes except that aged control mice atesignificantly less than younger mice (fig. S13).Although wheel running was not significantlydifferent between control and VEGF mice, totaldistance covered, reflecting both voluntary andnonvoluntary activities, was higher in malemice and lower in female mice comparedwith control littermates (fig. S14). Whereasthere was no significant difference in dailytotal energy expenditure (TEE) at 12 monthsof age (fig. S15) or at 16 months of age be-tween control and VEGF males (Fig. 2F), aged-matched VEGF female mice had a significantlyhigher TEE than their controls (fig. S16). Thebasis for these apparent sexual dimorphismsin physical activity and daily TEE is unknown.Next, we investigated the potential for energyexpenditure through thermogenesis, i.e., heatproduction by uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1)–mediated mitochondrial uncoupling. Becausethermogenesis mostly takes place in inter-scapular brown adipose tissue (BAT), weexamined age-associated changes in BAThistology. A higher BAT mass was observedin 24 Mo control mice (fig. S17) but was mostlycomposed of large white-like adipocytes thathad undergone whitening indicative of lostthermogenic capacity. By contrast, BAT in 24 MoVEGF mice maintained a classic histologyof activated BAT characterized by smaller,multi-vacuolated adipocytes (Fig. 2G). Like-wise, thermogenic UCP1-expressing beigeadipocytes interspersed in white adipose tis-sue (WAT) were frequently observed in 24 MoVEGF mice but not in 24 Mo control mice(Fig. 2G).VEGF treatment ameliorates adverseage-associated alterations in adiposetissue and liverAging is usually accompanied by an increasein visceral fat deposition and by a decrease insubcutaneous fat, and both processes are as-sociated with negative health outcomes (20).Progressive fat accumulation in the abdomi-nal cavity of control mice and reduced aging-associated fat accumulation in VEGF mice weredirectly visualized using MRI (Fig. 3A) andwere further validated by weighing visceralGrunewald et al., Science 373, eabc8479 (2021) 30 July 2021 6 of 9Fig. 5. Inflammaging and tumorigenesis alleviated in VEGF-treated mice. (A) Blood granulocytes in miceof the indicated ages calculated as a percentage of total leukocyte counts. (B) CRP levels in blood of mice ofthe indicated ages. (C) MCP1 levels in blood of control and VEGF mice (left) and of 16 Mo mice and age-matched sFlt1 mice (right). (D) Left: representative images of H&E–stained WAT and liver sections from18 Mo control mice. Note multiple foci of perivascular and perinecrotic immune cell infiltrates (boxed areasenlarged). Right: CD45+ immune cells in WAT and liver of mice of the indicated ages and genotypes.(E) Percentage of animals remaining spontaneously tumor free at sacrifice in control and VEGF mice. Valuesare shown as mean ± SEM. P values were derived from one-way ANOVA and Tukey posttest [(A) to (D)]or log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test (E). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; P values > 0.05 are not indicated.RES EARCH | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L Eon July 31, 2021http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from
Page 8
WAT harvested at sacrifice (Fig. 3B). Protec-tion from loss of subdermal fat was evidencedby counting more layers of subcutaneous adipo-cytes in skin sections of 24 Mo VEGF micecompared with control littermates (Fig. 3C).Aging generally correlates with progressiveaccumulation of fat within hepatocytes (liversteatosis), a condition predisposing olderpersons to hepatocyte injury and severe liverpathologies (21). Inspection of liver sectionsfrom 24 Mo mice, highlighting lipid dropletsby Oil Red O staining, revealed that, in con-trast to the highly steatotic liver of controllittermates, lipid deposition in hepatocyteswas greatly reduced in VEGF mice, in whichthe degree of steatosis resembled more closelythat measured in 3 Mo mice (Fig. 3D). Con-versely, VEGF loss of function by prematuresFlt1 induction led to aggravation of liversteatosis (Fig. 3E). Inspection of liver sectionsby electron microscopy (EM) corroboratedreduced deposition of lipid droplets in oldVEGF mice livers and revealed additionaladverse alterations reduced by VEGF treat-ment (fig. S18). Reduced liver injury in 24 MoVEGF mice was reflected in reduced serumlevels of the liver enzymes alanine transam-inase and aspartate transaminase (Fig. 3F).Because liver steatosis has been linked tohepatic senescence (22), we examined liversections stained for senescence-associatedb-galactosidase (SA-b-gal) activity. SA-b-galactivity in the livers of old control mice wasmostly associated with sinusoidal BVs andonly rarely with hepatocytes (Fig. 3G). Quan-tification of SA-b-Gal+/CD31+ double-positivecells in liver cell suspensions revealed thatsenescent ECs had accumulated in the agedliver. VEGF reduced the fraction of senescentECs such that by 2 years of age, VEGF micehad senescent ECs comparable in number tothose in 6 Mo control mice (Fig. 3H). Con-sistent with these results, hepatic p16 expres-sion was up-regulated in the livers of 24 Mocontrol mice but greatly reduced in the liversof age-matched VEGF mice (Fig. 3I).VEGF treatment protects from age-related lossof muscle and boneAging is associated with progressive loss ofskeletal muscle mass and in reduced muscleforce–generating capacity (sarcopenia). Becauseage-related loss of muscle mass in rodents ismuch lower than that in humans, with only~15% loss at mean life span (23), we examinedother anatomical features typifying old muscle(24). Mispositioned, centrally located nuclei,reflecting a postinjury muscle response inaged and diseased muscles, were frequentlyobserved in hindlimb muscles of 24 Mo con-trol mice but significantly less so in musclesof VEGF-treated littermates (Fig. 4A). Inspec-tion of muscle sections by EM revealed ad-ditional anatomical features frequently observedin muscles of 24 Mo control mice but lessfrequently in muscles of 24 Mo VEGF mice(fig. S19). Subsarcolemmal-localized mitochon-dria, which were previously shown to con-tribute to exercise-induced muscular functionimprovement (25), were more abundant inmuscle fibers of old VEGF mice (Fig. 4B andfig. S19).To evaluate the functional significance ofstructural mitochondrial alterations in mus-cle, oxygen consumption rates (OCRs) inyoung and old muscles were compared usinga Seahorse platform. Results showed thatmyofibrils isolated from skeletal muscle of24 Mo VEGF mice had significantly higherbasal and maximal respiration rates and ahigher rate of ATP production than myofi-brils isolated from age-matched controls. Con-versely, myofibrils isolated from skeletal muscleof 16 Mo sFlt1-induced mice had significantlylower OCR than their control littermates (Fig. 4C).To evaluate differences in force-generating cap-acity, mice at progressive ages were subjectedto a rotarod analysis. Results showed thataging VEGF mice stayed on the rotating rodsignificantly longer than age-matched con-trols, with 32 Mo VEGF mice performing aswell as control mice half their age (Fig. 4D).Improved rotarod performance was similarlyobserved using AAV-mediated VEGF deliveryto wild-type mice. The 10 Mo mice that wereinfected with AAV-VEGF 2 months earliercould hold onto a rotating rod 49% longerthan their mock-infected littermates could(Fig. 4E). Improved rotarod performance wasassociated with increased MVD in the muscleof AAV-VEGF–treated mice (Fig. 4F).Bone weakening caused by bone tissue loss(osteoporosis) is the most common cause ofbone breakage in older persons, especiallypostmenopausal women. Imaging the tibiasof 24 Mo female mice by microcomputedtomography (micro-CT) showed that the sub-stantial bone thinning observed in old controlmice was reduced in old VEGF mice who had,on average, 33% more bone than control lit-termates (Fig. 4G).Age-related alterations in muscle and boneare often manifested in kyphosis, which canbe measured from x-ray images: 24 Mo VEGFmice had a 38% higher kyphosis index (i.e.,lower outward curve of the spine) than theircontrol littermates (Fig. 4H).VEGF treatment reduces “inflammaging” andspontaneous tumor burden“Inflammaging,” or age-related multiorganchronic inflammation, is a fundamental hall-mark of aging (26). An elevated fraction ofgranulocytes among circulating leukocytes,indicative of ongoing inflammation, was ob-served in most old control mice examinedbut not in age-matched VEGF mice (Fig. 5A).Likewise, longitudinal measurements of theinflammation marker C-reactive protein (CRP)in blood serum showed that, unlike age-matched controls, 24 Mo VEGF mice pre-sented low CRP levels comparable to thosedetected in 3 Mo mice (Fig. 5B). Monocytechemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), also rec-ognized as a frailty marker (27) and validatedhere to be up-regulated in blood of 24 Mocontrol mice, was barely elevated in age-matched VEGF mice (Fig. 5C). Conversely,sFlt1 induction led to accelerated MCP-1 accu-mulation in blood by the age of 16 months(Fig. 5C). Reduced inflammaging in old VEGFmice was also evidenced by the lower numberof histologically discernable perivascular inflam-matory infiltrates, fewer foci of necrotic inflam-mation, and a reduced number of infiltratedCD45-positive immune cells enumerated insingle-cell suspensions of liver and WAT (Fig. 5D).Fewer VEGF mice presented one or moreneoplastic lesions compared with age-matchedcontrol mice when examined at sacrifice(Fig. 5E). The most abundant tumors includedlymphomas, lung adenocarcinomas, hepato-cellular carcinomas, lipomas, and fibromas(tables S1 and S2). This finding eliminatedthe concern that transgenic VEGF at thedoses used herein may enhance tumorigenesis.Whether there is a causal relationship betweenreduced inflammaging, a trait recognized asa major tumor promoter (28), and reducedtumor burden in old VEGF mice remains tobe determined.DiscussionAging-associated processes take place at dif-ferent levels of the biological hierarchy, notjust at the cellular level but also at the levelof the organ support systems, where vascularaging appears to play a major role. Placingvascular aging in a hierarchically high positionin organ aging, as was previously suggested(3), is strongly supported by our findings thatVEGF-assisted preservation of a young-likevascular homeostasis alleviates key cellularaging hallmarks and age-associated pathol-ogies and, conversely, that premature VEGFneutralization accelerates aging-associatedphenotypes. Our data suggest the followingsequence of events: increased production ofinhibitory VEGF decoy receptors leads toVEGF signaling insufficiency and a resultantfailure to maintain adequate MVD. Micro-vascular deficit, in turn, leads to compromisedperfusion, reduced tissue oxygenation, com-promised mitochondrial activity, and meta-bolic alterations. Metabolically active organs,such as the adipose tissue, skeletal muscles,and liver, then progressively lose function and,in the cases of bone and subcutaneous adiposetissue, this is accompanied by significant tis-sue loss. Therefore, a small increase in cir-culating VEGF counteracts many adverseprocesses. This suggests that securing properGrunewald et al., Science 373, eabc8479 (2021) 30 July 2021 7 of 9RES EARCH | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L Eon July 31, 2021http://science.sciencemag.org/Downloaded from
Page 9
vascular homeostasis during aging might con-fer a comprehensive geroprotection, i.e., alle-viation of major age-related pathologies suchas age-associated weight gain, hepatic steato-sis, osteoporosis, inflammaging, and increasedtumor burden. Further studies might revealadditional organ systems that benefit fromVEGF and/or vascular manipulations.VEGF supplementation resulted in increasedlongevity of VEGF mice. It is difficult tocompare the magnitude of life-span extensionobtained by VEGF treatment with that at-tained by other anti-aging manipulations giventhe relatively short life span of the mixedmouse strain used in this study (originatingfrom a BALB/cOlaHsd and C57BL/6J cross-ing) compared with other C57BL/6J–derivedstrains. In fact, it has been argued that life-span–extending manipulations may remedydeficiencies in the genetic makeup or in theenvironment of one particular strain ratherthan altering the aging process (29). A non-genetic experimental factor that could haveaffected longevity was the presence of low-dosetetracycline included in the drinking water.Although the angiogenic activity of VEGFplays a critical role in the phenotypes observedin this study by virtue of securing adequateperfusion, it is possible that non-angiogenicfunctions of VEGF play additional geropro-tective roles. For example, insufficient VEGFsignals were shown to cause a closure of ECfenestrations (30) that, when taking place forexample in endocrine organs, is bound to im-pair systemic hormone distribution. VEGFactivity also functions in vascular permeabilityand acts on nonvascular cells (e.g., immunecells) expressing cognate VEGF receptors. Asan example, monocytes impair arteriogenesisin aged mice through sFlt1 production (31).We observed increased production of sys-temic VEGFR1 (sVEGFR1) caused by an age-related shift in the alternative splicing ofVEGFR1 mRNA. Alterations in splicing pat-terns occur frequently in aging (32), and it willbe of interest to identify the splicing factorsresponsible for the age-related shift in VEGFR1mRNA splicing. Additional mechanisms con-tributing to reduced VEGF signaling in agingmight include impaired HIF1 activation and ablunted hypoxic VEGF responsiveness (33).Because the increased levels of systemicVEGF in the mice studied here were in effectfrom 8 months (corresponding to a humanage of 40 years) onward, the VEGF-inducedanti-aging effects described should be viewedas preventive in nature. Whether VEGF treat-ments could be harnessed for reversingestablished aging phenotypes remains to beinvestigated. A correlation between VEGF re-gulation and age-related human pathologiesand longevity was also suggested by humanstudies of polymorphisms in the VEGF genepromoter region (34).This study demonstrates that perturbationof microvascular homeostasis is a critical drivingforce in multiorgan aging. Correspondingly,it suggests that harnessing VEGF-aided resto-ration of vascular homeostasis may serve as amethod for inducing a multifaceted increasein health span.Methods summaryA transgenic Tet-off system was used for liver-specific, conditional VEGF-A164 induction inmice originating from a BALB/cOlaHsd andC57BL/6J crossing, producing modestly elevatedlevels of circulatory VEGF from early adulthoodonward. A comparable level of VEGF (150 to200 pg/ml of plasma) was attained using AAV-assisted VEGF delivery to naive mice. For VEGFloss of function, transgenic sVEGFR1 was con-ditionally induced using an EC-specific drivingtransgene. VEGF and sVEGFR1 serum levelswere monitored using VEGF and VEGFR1enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)and VEGF signaling by measuring the fractionof VEGFR2 phosphorylation from total VEGFR2.Phenotypic longitudinal analyses performedin control and manipulated mice littermatesincluded the following: MRI-based measure-ments of the fat-to-lean ratio; ultrasoundphotoacoustics measurement of tissue oxygen-ation; x-ray bone visualization and micro-CTmeasurements of bone volume; OCR measure-ments in isolated muscle fibers using a Sea-horse platform; rotarod analysis for measuringmuscle-generating force; metabolic analysis,TEE, and physical activity measured in meta-bolic cages; endothelial senescence quantifiedby measuring SA-b-gal activity in sorted ECs;inflammaging evaluated by leukocyte infiltra-tion and by measuring inflammation markersin blood; and tumor burden evaluated by vis-ual inspection at sacrifice. Reverse transcrip-tion polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), EM,and immunohistochemistry were performedusing standard methods. GraphPad Prismversion 7 software was used for statisticalanalysis. A detailed account of the methodsused in this study is provided in the sup-plementary materials.RE FERENCES AND NOTES1. S. Rafii, J. M. Butler, B. S. Ding, Angiocrine functions of organ-specific endothelial cells. Nature 529, 316–325(2016). doi: 10.1038/nature17040; pmid: 267917222. Z. Ungvari et al., Endothelial dysfunction and angiogenesisimpairment in the ageing vasculature. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 15, 555–565(2018). doi: 10.1038/s41569-018-0030-z; pmid: 297954413. D. G. Le Couteur, E. G. Lakatta, A vascular theory of aging.J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 65, 1025–1027 (2010).doi: 10.1093/gerona/glq135; pmid: 206508624. B. J. North, D. A. Sinclair, The intersection between aging andcardiovascular disease. Circ. Res. 110, 1097–1108 (2012).doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.246876; pmid: 224999005. M. S. Goligorsky, Microvascular rarefaction: The decline and fallof blood vessels. Organogenesis 6, 1–10 (2010). doi: 10.4161/org.6.1.10427; pmid: 205928596. A. P. Kusumbe, S. K. Ramasamy, R. H. Adams, Coupling ofangiogenesis and osteogenesis by a specific vessel subtype inbone. Nature 507, 323–328 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nature13145;pmid: 246469947. Y. Hasegawa et al., Blockade of the nuclear factor-kB pathwayin the endothelium prevents insulin resistance and prolongs lifespans. Circulation 125, 1122–1133 (2012). doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.054346; pmid: 223028388. A. Das et al., Impairment of an endothelial NAD+-H2S signalingnetwork is a reversible cause of vascular aging. Cell 173, 74–89.e20(2018). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.008; pmid: 295709999. S. Tarantini et al., Nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN)supplementation rescues cerebromicrovascular endothelialfunction and neurovascular coupling responses and improvescognitive function in aged mice. Redox Biol. 24, 101192 (2019).doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101192; pmid: 3101514710. M. B. Chen et al., Brain endothelial cells are exquisitesensors of age-related circulatory cues. Cell Rep. 30,4418–4432.e4 (2020). doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.012;pmid: 3223447711. A. J. Barinda et al., Endothelial progeria induces adipose tissuesenescence and impairs insulin sensitivity through senescenceassociated secretory phenotype. Nat. Commun. 11, 481 (2020).doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-14387-w; pmid: 3198064312. A. Lazarus, E. Keshet, Vascular endothelial growth factor andvascular homeostasis. Proc. Am. Thorac. Soc. 8, 508–511(2011). doi: 10.1513/pats.201102-021MW; pmid: 2205292813. A. S. Maharaj, M. Saint-Geniez, A. E. Maldonado, P. A. D’Amore,Vascular endothelial growth factor localization in the adult.Am. J. Pathol. 168, 639–648 (2006). doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2006.050834; pmid: 1643667714. D. May et al., Transgenic system for conditional induction andrescue of chronic myocardial hibernation provides insights intogenomic programs of hibernation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.105, 282–287 (2008). doi: 10.1073/pnas.0707778105;pmid: 1816255015. T. Licht et al., VEGF preconditioning leads to stem cellremodeling and attenuates age-related decay of adulthippocampal neurogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113,E7828–E7836 (2016). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1609592113;pmid: 2784957716. K. Furrer et al., Serotonin reverts age-related capillarizationand failure of regeneration in the liver through a VEGF-dependent pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,2945–2950 (2011). doi: 10.1073/pnas.1012531108;pmid: 2128265417. T. Takahashi, S. Yamaguchi, K. Chida, M. Shibuya,A single autophosphorylation site on KDR/Flk-1 is essentialfor VEGF-A-dependent activation of PLC-gamma and DNAsynthesis in vascular endothelial cells. EMBO J. 20,2768–2778 (2001). doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.11.2768;pmid: 1138721018. R. L. Kendall, K. A. Thomas, Inhibition of vascular endothelialcell growth factor activity by an endogenously encodedsoluble receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90,10705–10709 (1993). doi: 10.1073/pnas.90.22.10705;pmid: 824816219. C. E. Riera, A. Dillin, Tipping the metabolic scales towardsincreased longevity in mammals. Nat. Cell Biol. 17, 196–203(2015). doi: 10.1038/ncb3107; pmid: 2572095920. J. L. Kuk, T. J. Saunders, L. E. Davidson, R. Ross, Age-relatedchanges in total and regional fat distribution. Ageing Res. Rev.8, 339–348 (2009). doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2009.06.001;pmid: 1957630021. I. H. Kim, T. Kisseleva, D. A. Brenner, Aging and liver disease.Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 31, 184–191 (2015). doi: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000176; pmid: 2585034622. M. Ogrodnik et al., Cellular senescence drives age-dependenthepatic steatosis. Nat. Commun. 8, 15691 (2017). doi: 10.1038/ncomms15691; pmid: 2860885023. S. B. Ballak, H. Degens, A. de Haan, R. T. Jaspers, Agingrelated changes in determinants of muscle force generatingcapacity: A comparison of muscle aging in men and malerodents. Ageing Res. Rev. 14, 43–55 (2014). doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2014.01.005; pmid: 2449539324. R. K. Sayed et al., Identification of morphological markers ofsarcopenia at early stage of aging in skeletal muscle of mice.Exp. Gerontol. 83, 22–30 (2016). doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2016.07.007; pmid: 2743549625. E. V. Menshikova et al., Effects of exercise on mitochondrialcontent and function in aging human skeletal muscle. J.Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 61, 534–540 (2006).doi: 10.1093/gerona/61.6.534; pmid: 1679913326. S. Salvioli et al., Inflamm-aging, cytokines and aging: State ofthe art, new hypotheses on the role of mitochondria and newperspectives from systems biology. Curr. Pharm. Des. 1 

(PDF) Counteracting age-related VEGF signaling insufficiency promotes healthy aging and extends life span. Available from: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353560185_Counteracting_age-related_VEGF_signaling_insufficiency_promotes_healthy_aging_and_extends_life_span [accessed Jul 22 2025].